---
title: Some thoughts about Coursera
date: 2012-10-17
---

Some thoughts about Coursera
============================

After [completing Compilers and Automata
courses](/posts/2012-06-27-some-impressions-on-stanfords-automata-and-compilers-online-courses.html)
on [Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/) I am participating in yet another
course: Writing in the Sciences. I guess the name is pretty self-explanatory but
just to make it clear: the course is about writing scientific articles. This is
something I definitely need as a scientist for my work. I never considered
writing to be my strong skill so I look forward to completing this
course. _Writing in the sciences_ is lead by professor Kristin Sainani. It is a
well-known fact that fun from learning depends not on the subject itself, but
mostly on the lecturer's ability to present information in enjoyable and
interesting way. Professor Sainani's lectures are a great example of that, in
contrast to professor Ullman's lectures on automata, which I personally found a
bit dry.

That said, I guess I have a few reasons to complain about the course and
Coursera as a whole. While lectures given by professor Sainani are interesting,
it is sad that she practically does not participate in the forums. I know that
it probably takes a lot of time to prepare the lectures, but still I'd expect
the lecturer to spend an hour on the forums once every 5-6 days. While the
forums are for the students to help each other with learning, there are some
issues that must be resolved by course staff. A good example is a problem with
downloading one of this week's lectures. It was reported on Monday and after two
days the problem remains unfixed despite numerous complaints on the forum (to
make things worse, this lecture is about assignment that is due to the end of
week). Another thing that makes participation in the course more difficult is
publishing new material on Mondays. I have a lot of time on Sundays so I could
easily watch new material on weekend and do the homework during the week. That's
how it was done in Compilers course. With videos released at the beginning of a
week I have problems with finding time to watch them and even more problems with
doing the homework. Again, there was request on the forums to release videos one
day earlier, but no response from the course staff. I am also very sceptical
about the grading methods. With compilers or automata it was easy to design
tests. In _Writing in the Sciences_ it is not that simple. During the weekly
tests students are asked to rewrite some fragments of scientific articles, but
this cannot be graded automatically. I personally find these tests difficult. I
usually come up with answers that I consider great, but after comparing them to
model answers I am mostly thinking "why didn't I figure this out". Oh well, I
guess that's what learning is all about. I also wonder how the upcoming
peer-review will work out. The plan is to have students review each others
homework assignment (a short review of a scientific paper). I'm afraid that this
may be a failure. One unfavourable factor is the time needed to review five
different papers. Another one is that people come from different cultural
backgrounds, know English on a moderate level and, saying straight out, often
seem to misinterpret intentions of the writer and the message he/she is trying
to convey (I'm judging from the forums and not trying to offend anyone).

While not getting feedback from professor Sainani is a problem of one particular
course, I noticed that a general problem of Coursera is lack of any kind of
technical support. Sure there is an address to technical support, but I have
never received any kind of reply despite reporting a couple of problems. I am
aware that Course is dealing with over a million participants and it is
impossible to respond to every mail, but it wouldn't hurt them to send at least
an automatic "we will look into your problem" response. Since I never got any
response and I don't see the reported problems fixed I feel as though my mails
were being send to /dev/null.

Another reason to complain is Coursera's lax approach to announced time
schedules. I already learned that despite being announced, courses get delayed
and even cancelled. I understand that a one week slip is possible, but how can
it happen that a course is planned for early July and it hasn't started yet? It
seems that someone who planned the course didn't take his job seriously.

With all that said I still think that Coursera is a revolutionary approach to
education. All it needs is just a bit more work and a bit more involvement.

